Julián Quijano, Creative Director at Beautiful Glitch

1. How did you get your start in game development? What was your motivation?

2. Tell me about the history of Beautiful Glitch and its founding. What spurred you to found the studio?

   1&2. Nothing in particular. I always loved creating stuff and writing. And I wanted at some point to try to work on something on my own that could potentially give me financial independence. I actually studied advertising and PR. Dream-wise, I just wanted to write, either short stories or a novel (I love literature). More realistically I juggled on business ideas with a dash of creativity, like digital services or mobile apps. At some point I landed a small gig at a videogame indie studio. I like videogames very much, and in a little less than a year at that job I gained some understanding of the underlying systems of creating a game. As I get into something (anything) I naturally start producing ideas. Like if I worked at a restaurant, I would have probably taken notes and brainstormed restaurant-related ideas for businesses. But since I was at a game studio, my mind went into that direction and over the months I had some silly ideas and a hunger for creating my own thing. When that job ended, I had some humble savings of my own and a very unrealistic notion of the cost of making a game, so I was reckless enough to try. And that's how I really started into game development. 

3. What have been some of the biggest takeaways from starting your own studio? What do you wish you knew at the beginning that you know now? 

   Oh, I know it is anticlimactic, but it's hard to think of big takeaways. It is more of an organic slow process in which you keep learning every day. When looking back, there's a million things I see as they could have been done better. Best I can do is making real and constant efforts in being open to improvement. 

4. What have been some of the challenges in running your own studio alongside developing the games themselves?

   A big challenge is scaling up at the right pace while remaining efficient as the value of your time and work changes rapidly. We have serious issues scaling up and as a result we scale up quite slowly (which is not ideal; but still better than trying to scale up too fast, in my opinion). It's also complex to make operational choices wisely, especially when the value of our time changes often. Looking back, I can think of a lot of tasks that we spent too much time on. This is closely tied with the scaling up thing. We're currently 4 people in the office, and until we manage to increase that number, any task has the risk of bottlenecking other tasks. This makes most choices very sensible. 

5. I know that Monster Prom was enormously successful, especially in the eyes of the critics (I know I loved it), but what specifically inspired Monster Prom 2? 

   While working on Monster Prom we dreamed a bit about what expanding the universe would mean. There's some KS updates from 2016 that already mentioned the notion of "Monster Camp". The idea of creating new settings for these characters and such. After the release of the game we decided to do a Kickstarter campaign specially to get a better understanding of the interest in expanding this IP. The response was overwhelming. As a result we promised not one but many sequels. We're committed to this, but truth to be told, we wonder often if we didn't go a bit overboard. We basically promised 3-5 more games within the IP. It's a lot! Good news is the only date promise we made was with the first sequel, which we actually fulfilled. Now we could very well take 5 years per sequel if that was needed. We still are trying to have swift processes and make the games in rather short periods; but knowing we have this freedom is a bit relaxing, specially because we want at some point to start working on other IPs too. 

6. What did the development process look like for Monster Prom 2? How did it differ (or converge) with development of Monster Prom?

   Monster Camp's process was way cleaner and clearer than Monster Prom's. Still there was an obvious evolution during the ~18 months of development. Especially in the last 6-9 months we implemented new systems and tools that eased everything a lot. It makes us very optimistic about the processes of future games. We're quite chaotic, to be honest. I'd say now we're a bit less chaotic! The first months we pushed ourselves to create two demos. We needed a very rough one for the KS that was more of an interactive promotion for the campaign. But then we had 2-3 months to create a basic actual demo for PAX West 2019. After that, in Fall 2019 we delved more strongly onto the meat of production (art and narrative). And in early 2020 we started to go more extensively on the programming. In summer we started tackling orbital (yet very important) stuff such as the credits' animation or promotional actions such as collaborating with artists. All this while narrative and art kept focusing on main production. In summer or so we started the post-production of narrative, which is big on a game like ours (reviewing everything for quality, sensitivity, and other reasons). By the middle of 2020 we sat and discussed if we should rush into an October release or wait. Our main issue was that due to the Winter holidays, missing October meant a February release at best. We decided we could leave some non-essential features (such as the gallery) for after the release (in actuality, it's what happened with Monster Prom too), and went for the October release. It made us very happy, as there's a special joy in delivering a game. There was (is) still work to do, but it feels different when you know the product is out there, and the audience seems to like it already.

7. What sets Monster Prom 2 apart from Monster Prom, short of the new setting in a camp?

   Monster Camp shows some evolution and the symptoms of Prom's success. These symptoms take form on some whims we indulged ourselves, especially more art content. Thanks to having more resources and experiences we could do stuff such as collaborating with guest artists or even including some degree of animation in our credits sequence. Then there's other weird beautiful stuff, like the music. We even composed an anime song! 

   Then you can see the evolution in many parts, but specially in the narrative. We had a clearer vision of the IP's tone. My only concern is that content is sensibly longer (something we will try to correct a bit in future games); but the style is clearer and more consistent. I find it to be better, and a clear result of writers (and myself as creative director) who understand the product, the universe, and its characters better. Also, we've improved systems and processes such as our sensitivity reading. Writing irreverent humor with a good message is always a challenge, and I get the feeling we've produced a more well-rounded product that isn't shy of packing punches but that does so in a more sensible manner. We even included a new feature that lets players filter some events out based on specific trigger warnings. 

   In conclusion, Monster Camp feels more mature as a product and piece of fiction. We feel quite proud of the result not only on itself, but as a step forward from the first game. It has filled our hearts with joy to see that most of the Steam reviews praise the game for being not only good, but better than its predecessor. 

8. What about the Monster Prom IP (you made a sequel so I get to officially call it that) compelled you to develop more than one game in this universe? Are you planning on continuing to pursue Monster Prom games? 

   As said, we're kinda bound to it! We haven't started the first steps for the 3rd installment as we're still focusing a bit on some Prom and Camp stuff; but some discussions have been held. We like these characters and would love to keep expanding the universe, although I must be honest and say that the task gives us some vertigo. The first two games (and DLC) add up to around 2,000 pages of dialogue if I am correct. Every event has 2 options, and most times 4 outcomes. It is like at least 10 jokes per event... so we assume we've written probably more than 10,000 jokes easily. At times we feel the well will empty itself. Already with Camp we've felt at times we're exhausting a lot of variables here. This has upsides and downsides. At our lowest, we wonder how much this can go. Humor is wonderful, but it's also some sort of system, like a limited (even if vast) set of possible formulas. It happens that we come with an absurd idea for a twist. And as incredibly absurd as it might be, we swiftly identify 4-5 other times in which a joke with a similar formula has been utilized. We try to remind ourselves that writing for Monster Prom is building a big iceberg and 90% of players will probably see 10% of it (just not the 10%, all depending on their choices and randomness). So what feels worn out for us, may not be for the players. But it is indeed one of the things that scares us the most when working on the same IP. The upside is nice, tho. By exhausting formulas, we force ourselves into exploring new paths, even some that seem a bit out of tone for the IP. This actually has helped Monster Camp to be a wonderful experience at times, as we've devised events that are weird and inventive in new ways, even if just narrative like setting the whole outcome of an event 300 years in the future through the conversation of a tavern keeper and a wanderer in Hell. 

   So, we're equal parts scared and excited at the idea of working once again on the IP! 


9. When you think about the future of Monster Prom, what are you most excited about? What are you most worried about?

   Well, our biggest worry is the notion that the IP will unequivocally wear out over the years and we're yet to make some more games. I know it feels cold when said like that, but I need to keep an eye on the costs and gains. As said, we're trying to scale up in order to do more things and better; but of course the downside of that is that I have the responsibility to be sure the games are giving returns in order to sustain the whole system. We're committed to do all the next games we promised (and excited about it); but it is inarguable that I worry in thinking of the breaking point where a game within the IP won't be capable of covering its cost. There's not much to do about it, other than keep doing our best in creating good games, of course. 

   Some of the new games feel exciting because we're aiming to innovate more. Camp was the first of the sequels because it was the closest to Prom. But the next ones aim to be different, even within new genres (although always narrative). For Roadtrip, for instance, we want it to be a narrative game with survival mechanics. This is super exciting for us to think on new mechanics and how the narrative needs to adapt to it. But it's scary because it means that -although we will keep specific mechanics to enable romance- the game won't revolve so clearly on dating. We think this is exciting and a chance to explore more sides to the characters; but it scares us in alienating a fanbase who prefer the idea of flirting with the monsters instead of doing new other things. 

10. Where do you see your studio, and Monster Prom 2, at this time next year?

    Here in Barcelona! Well, hopefully (and if the COVID situation is somewhat in a better place) we actually hope more of the studio is here in Barcelona. Most of our main collaborators work remotely, but it has been our dream to get more people who lives here and even convince some of the people abroad to move (temporarily or for good) to our city. This is a special point for this kind of question, because as we are finishing the main remaining content updates and features for Camp, we're asking this question ourselves. We are exploring the possibility of mobile. We are starting to draw a first draft of a roadmap for Monster Prom 3. We're brainstorming ideas for a new IP. We hope some (if not all) of that has taken off by then. And we hope to have progressed and finished some smaller side projects. We have a small arcade game that we want to release this year. And we're finalizing the 3rd installment of a book called the INDIE G ZINE. We hope by next year we're working on a new MP game, on a new IP, and at least one smaller side project that's not a videogame. Anything that keeps us moving creatively, which gives us plenty of joy! 
